Grid.
It's more than the world of Tron.
Anyone, any Tron fans?
No, just me.
I liked Tron, it was a good movie.
I just like the soundtrack,
if I'm being totally honest.
Anyway, it's a CSS property.
So this is the latest and
greatest way to do CSS.
This wasn't in the previous
version of this course,
because it was too new at that point.
But now I'm pretty safe to say most people
can ship grid on their website with
unprefixed it'll just work.
So grid is exactly what it sounds like,
it allows you to set out.
CSS elements in a grid like fashion,
it's really useful for
like laying out entire pages.
So let's get into what I mean with that.
So I have all these lovely
pictures of Luna, good doggie, and
they're laid out in just like
a nice little grid pattern, right?
With grid that's really easy to do,
you say display grid, so to display flex.
I tell it how I wanted to lay out things
and I just want something that's just,
I want two on a row.
So, one fraction I think,
that's what it stands for.
So ,one fraction,
one fraction which means 50-50, right?
And give it a row-gap aka gutter
on the row side of 10 pixels and
a column gap, are a gutter on
the column side of 10 pixels.
And then the grid pictures I took all
the way, all the margin and padding and
that's what we got.
Before you would have had to do like
clever margins and float left and
a bunch of stuff like that
to get this to lay out.
So easy with this.
If I want to change it to be an all in
one row, all I gotta do is that and
I'll send it will rearrange them
as being everything on one row.
So that's what that 1fr is,
it's just saying like I just want this
many if I put one like this,
it should have three on one row and
then we'll have one row
with just one on it, right?
As you might imagine, if I wanted them to
be each on their own row, there you go.
So that's what the grid template columns
does is it just allows you to lay it out
on however you want
the columns to look and
then it'll just figure it out from there.
So powerful, this is again,
I want you to understand this.
This is so much better than it used to be.
Okay.
So that's what those are.
Yeah, that's another thing
that might be useful to you.
So 1fr,
1fr just said like they're equal sizes.
If for whatever reason you wanted
the second column to be bigger, right?
Now the first one is smaller.
So this is a smaller dog picture and
this is a larger dog picture.
Or you wanted to have like
a big one in the middle and
then smaller ones on the side, right?
All of these are very possible.
So the fr is just saying like
one fractional thing and
like it'll automatically figure out
what the percentages that it has to do,
and it'll include the gutters.
If you do like the row gap and the column
gap, it just does all that math for
you so you don't have to figure it out.
When I worked my very first dev job,
I did a lot of PHP,
I literally had a calculator at my desk so
I could figure out
what the pixels were going to be or
like the correct percentages to do.
Silly stuff,
silly stuff you don't have to do anymore
>> When did they introduce this?
Because I remember kind of
[CROSSTALK] like I want
something in the middle of the page.
>> Can I use as a blessing?
You can just search for something and
it'll tell you the support across
all browsers, so right now,
94.29% of current web
traffic supports grid.
And you can see there we're
missing it on Opera Mini,
old Internet Explorer, that's
probably what takes it down so much.
Old versions of Edge, but
Chrome since looks like
52 which released in 2017,
and or that was Firefox.
But yeah 2017 basically is when like
really good support started going
>> Fun before, yeah,
I was just new to me cool.
>> Yeah.
So, tracks desktop if you do that,
okay plus that.
So if you click Filter this will get it
probably down to more which are expected,
and anywhere.
You need to check it
relative to your traffic.
So for example, Netflix for example didn't
see almost any traffic from UC Browser for
Android which is more popular.
I wanna say second India, anyway other
parts of the world, whereas like Netflix
at that time had no traffic because
we didn't support India at the time.
Netflix does now support India.
So we've basically got to
ignore that browser, but
it doesn't have the best support for
everything.
So, we could kind of use
more modern techniques,
because they're only 4% is not the best.
You want to be like 99% generally.
Yeah, there's a lot of stuff here.
Anyway, can I use website?
MDN will have a lot of
that information as well.
Cool.
So, let's take a more
complicated look at this.
That was a basic example of just
laying out pictures on a page.
But let's say we wanna achieve this,
where we have like a header,
which goes all the way across
until you hit a sidebar.
We wanna have a body here and
the you want to skip a little bit here.
And then we wanna have a footer
that goes all the way across and
we want this sidebar to go
span two different rows.
I imagine this is like
the header of your website,
this would be like the body which would
be super long, so let's say the body,
let's just give this a height of like
600 pixels like something really tall.
Notice that the sidebar automatically
scaled to match that as well, right?
So that's what this is doing for us,
we get this like a height of 100 pixels.
Get this like a nice height there.
We're letting sidebar just
kind of dynamically scale and
we'll give this a height of 200 pixels.
And now this has like a nice
thick height as well.
So you can imagine like laying out your
entire website using grid like this,
right?
One of my favorite ways to use grid is
you can just identify as like all right,
grid area you'll give it a name, so
you get to choose this name, right?
Doesn't have to be the name of the class,
it can be anything,
I just call it nav header,
this one is the main body.
This is the nav side and
this is the footer, right?
Then I can come down here to my page
which is overlaying everything and
I can just use English to
describe what I want to build.
So nav header, nav header, so I want
this to take two slots here which you
can see here it does or
three slots, right?
Nav header, nav header, nav header and
then nav site at the end.
Then main body, main body, so two, right?
So it goes to,
I put a period to signify skip this,
put nothing here, and then nav site.
So it can see that these
two are the same thing, so
it'll squish them together and then I
want footer to go all the way across.
And the browser just slices and dices that
picks it apart and makes a layout for
you based on that.
I can just wanna emphasize that this
used to be so much harder to do.
[LAUGH] I feel like I keep saying that,
but it's the damn truth, right?
This was so much harder to do, and now I
just get to describe it in English and
it just works.
Now, you can see I put spaces
here to get this all the lineup.
It doesn't have to do that.
I just did that for clarity sake.
But you're welcome to just do like
this and it'll figure it out.
You don't have to put that whitespace.
So you can actually even start combining
these things, and I can say grid,
template, columns and I can say that
I want my first one to take 1fr and
then I say 2fr this space here
wind up being a lot bigger.
And now notice that this,
despite the fact that this is only
taking up one column here and
notice that main body and the period here,
end up being the same size, right?
They're both technically two fractions
because I made this column here
take two fractions.
And then if I go back here to 1fr,
that'll be like that, or
let's say I want that to be so small.
So now this little gutter here ends up
being really small because everything else
is taking 10 fractions.
So it's cool you can kind of combined
all the different properties to get this
very specific layout
that you're looking for.
I just get really excited about grid
because it made something that was so
hard my life so easy.
So, again I'm just scratching the surface
here of what's possible with grid,
and I think Jen Kramer
again CSS teacher here for
front of masters has a whole course
that goes into the depth and
the amazingness that you
can accomplish with grid.
One of the things they didn't
talk about in this course,
is you can make your website responsive so
that on narrow screens,
it looks one way,
on wide screens it looks another way.
The nice thing about flex and grid is
if you just switch a couple properties,
they say like, hey, this size making so
everything's in columns and
then this size it's everything's in rows.
It'll just like switch the entire layout
with a couple of different things and
it just makes everything really easy.
So in other words, grid and
flex make responsive design very easy.
Okay, so I left you a link to CSS tricks,
if you want to read more about it.
I left you a link to Jen's class
if you want to learn more about it
from Jen who has a lot of depth in this
sort of stuff and is a great teacher.